CONTEXT.md, before:

# AI Engineering Context and Standards

This repository uses AI-assisted development.
All AI tools (Cursor, ChatGPT, Copilot, etc.) must follow this document.

If behavior is not explicitly allowed here or in docs/requirements.md,
it must not be implemented without clarification.

---

## 1. Design Principles

- Correctness over cleverness
- Explicit behavior over implicit assumptions
- Idempotent and safe by default
- Fail loudly, clearly, and early
- Prefer boring, maintainable solutions
- All code should be easily installed and uninstalled
- Adhere to Security best practices
- Adhere to SELinux best practices (semanage over chcon)

---

## 2. Supported Environments

- Primary OS: RHEL 9 / RHEL 10
- Secondary OS: Ubuntu 22.04 (best-effort)
- Shell: bash
- Python: 3.11+
- Do not assume additional tools are installed unless explicitly documented.

---

## 3. Bash Standards

- Use `#!/usr/bin/env bash`
- Scripts must start with:
  - `set -euo pipefail`
- Quote all variables
- Never use `eval`
- Validate all inputs early
- Use functions; avoid large monolithic scripts
- Use `trap` for cleanup when modifying system state

---

## 4. Python Standards

- Prefer standard library
- Use type hints for public functions
- Avoid global mutable state
- Use structured logging
- External calls must have timeouts
- Avoid `shell=True`
- CLI tools must support `--help`

---

## 5. Yaml and Json Standards

Configuration and data files must follow consistent, predictable formatting
to ensure readability, tooling compatibility, and long-term maintainability.

### 5.1 File Naming and Extensions

- YAML files **must** use the `.yaml` extension
  - `.yml` is **not allowed**
- JSON files **must** use the `.json` extension
- File extensions must accurately reflect file contents

### 5.2 YAML Standards

- YAML files must be valid YAML 1.2
- Indentation:
  - Use **2 spaces**
  - Never use tabs
- Use block-style YAML where possible
- Avoid implicit typing when ambiguity may exist:
  - Quote strings that could be misinterpreted (e.g., `yes`, `no`, `on`, `off`)
- Use explicit `null` instead of empty values when intentional
- Keys should use `snake_case` unless an external specification requires otherwise
- Lists should be written in expanded form (one item per line)
- Comments should explain *why*, not *what*

Example:

```yaml
log_level: "info"
enable_feature: false
retry_count: 3
servers:
  - host: example1.local
    port: 443
  - host: example2.local
    port: 443

```

---

### 5.3 JSON Standards

- JSON must be strictly valid
  - No comments
  - No trailing commas
- Use **2-space indentation**
- Use UTF-8 encoding
- Keys should use `snake_case` unless constrained by an external API
- Arrays and objects should be formatted for readability, not compactness
- Values must use explicit types (`true`, `false`, `null`)

Example:

```json
{
  "log_level": "info",
  "enable_feature": false,
  "retry_count": 3,
  "servers": [
    {
      "host": "example1.local",
      "port": 443
    },
    {
      "host": "example2.local",
      "port": 443
    }
  ]
}
```

---

## 6. Idempotency and Safety

- Scripts must be safe to re-run
- Existing state must be detected, not overwritten blindly
- Partial failures must be handled
- Destructive actions must be explicit and documented
- Provide `--dry-run` where reasonable

---

## 7. Security

### 7.1 Secrets Management - Summary: What Must Never Be Checked Into Git or Code

**The repository must never contain secrets** — any material that can be used to
authenticate, authorize, or bill against an account, service, or infrastructure.

This includes both files and inline values embedded in code or scripts.

#### 7.1.1 Definition of "Secrets"

A secret is any value that:

- Authenticates an identity
- Grants access to a system, API, or service
- Authorizes actions or permissions
- Enables billable usage
- Establishes cryptographic trust

If exposed, a secret can result in:

- Account compromise
- Unauthorized access
- Financial loss
- Infrastructure takeover

#### 7.1.2 Categories of Secrets That Must Never Be Committed

##### 7.1.2.1 API Keys

Static credentials used for programmatic access.

Examples:

- OpenAI API keys
- Stripe keys
- SendGrid keys
- Twilio keys

Risk:

- Immediate unauthorized API usage
- Direct financial impact

##### 7.1.2.2 Access Tokens and OAuth Tokens

Bearer tokens granting scoped or full access.

Examples:

- GitHub Personal Access Tokens (PATs)
- OAuth access tokens
- CI/CD tokens

Risk:

- Repository access
- Code modification
- Secret exfiltration

##### 7.1.2.3 Refresh Tokens

Long-lived tokens capable of minting new access tokens.

Risk:

- Persistent compromise
- Difficult to detect abuse

##### 7.1.2.4 Cloud Provider Credentials

Credentials granting infrastructure access.

Examples:

- AWS Access Key ID + Secret Key
- GCP service account JSON keys
- Azure client secrets

Risk:

- Infrastructure compromise
- Crypto-mining abuse
- Severe billing impact

##### 7.1.2.5 Cryptographic Private Keys

Keys establishing identity or trust.

Examples:

- SSH private keys (id_rsa, id_ed25519)
- TLS private keys (`*.pem`, `*.key`)
- Signing keys

Risk:

- Server access
- Trust chain compromise
- Man-in-the-middle attacks

##### 7.1.2.6 Service Account Credentials

Non-human credentials stored as files.

Examples:

- JSON/YAML credential files
- CI service secrets

Risk:

- Silent, high-privilege access

##### 7.1.2.7 Webhook Secrets and Shared Secrets

Used to validate inbound requests.

Examples:

- GitHub webhook secrets
- Stripe webhook signing secrets

Risk:

- Forged events
- Unauthorized state changes

#### 7.1.3 File Types and Locations That Must Be Excluded

The following must never be committed:

- `.env`, `.env.*` (except `.env.example`)
- `vars.env`, secret variable files
- Credential files (`*.pem`, `*.key`, `*.p12`, `*.json` keys)
- Generated logs containing sensitive values
- Tool caches that may contain secrets

These exclusions must be enforced via `.gitignore`.

#### 7.1.4 Code and Script Scanning Requirements

Secrets must not appear:

- Inline in source code
- In shell scripts
- In configuration files
- In comments
- In logs or debug output

Repositories must enforce:

- Pre-commit secret scanning via `scripts/detect-secrets.sh`
- CI-level secret detection via Gitleaks (scans full git history)
- SAST scanning via Semgrep (security audit and OWASP Top 10)
- Dependency vulnerability scanning via OSV-Scanner
- AI agent instructions prohibiting secret creation or logging

**Secret Detection Implementation**: This framework includes `scripts/detect-secrets.sh`, a
comprehensive secret detection script that:

- Scans staged files for API keys, tokens, credentials, and private keys
- Uses pattern matching for known secret formats (GitHub tokens, AWS keys, Stripe keys, etc.)
- Applies entropy analysis to detect high-entropy strings
- Filters false positives (variable names, example values, API endpoints, comments)
- Excludes test files, example files, and documentation from scanning
- Provides clear error messages with file location and context
- AI agents must understand that this script will block commits containing secrets
  and must never attempt to bypass or disable this protection.
- High-entropy strings and known token patterns must be treated as potential secrets until proven otherwise

#### 7.1.5 Security Posture Statement

**Secrets** — including API keys, access tokens, credentials, private keys, or any
material that grants authenticated or billable access — **must never be committed
to Git repositories** and must be actively scanned for in both code and configuration.

**⚠️ CRITICAL: Commit messages are permanent in git history and must NEVER contain:**
- Passwords, credentials, or secrets
- IP addresses (especially private/internal IPs)
- API keys or tokens
- Any sensitive information

Commit messages are scanned by `scripts/check-commit-message.sh` to prevent
accidental exposure of sensitive data in git history.

### 7.2 General Security Standards

- Never log secrets
- Credentials and IP addresses should never be hardcoded into scripts, should exist in `.env` file
- `.env` file should not be checked into any repo (`.gitignore`)
- An example `.env` file (`.env.example`) should be created and checked in via git
- Treat all inputs as untrusted
- Document required permissions
- Use least privilege
- Sanitize file paths and user input

---

## 8. Logging and Exit Codes

- Logs must be actionable and informative
- Logs should exist in /var/log
- Errors must explain what failed and why
- Exit codes:
  - 0: success
  - 1: general failure
  - 2: invalid usage or input
  - 3: missing dependency

---

## 9. Documentation Requirements

### 9.1 README Structure

README must include:
- Overview
- Include "tested on" shields [https://img.shields.io/]
- Requirements / dependencies
- Include high level architecture overview
- Installation
- Uninstall steps
- Usage examples
- Configuration
- Troubleshooting
- Security notes
- License (Apache 2.0)
- Documentation must be updated when features/functionality is updated

Operational tools must include docs/runbook.md.

### 9.2 Documentation Visual Standards

Documentation must be engaging, visually appealing, and easy to scan. The following
standards ensure consistency and improve readability.

#### 9.2.1 Visual Elements

- **Emojis**: Use relevant emojis for section headers and visual indicators
  - Examples: 🤖 for AI/automation, 🔒 for security, ✅ for success, ❌ for errors
  - Use emojis consistently throughout the document
  - Do not overuse emojis—aim for clarity, not clutter

- **Status Indicators**: Use checkmarks and X marks to show status
  - ✅ (checkmark) for positive states, included items, active features
  - ❌ (X mark) for negative states, excluded items, prohibited actions
  - ⚠️ (warning) for important cautions or best-effort items

- **Checkboxes**: Use markdown checkboxes for interactive lists
  - `- [ ]` for incomplete items
  - `- [x]` for completed items
  - Use in installation steps, troubleshooting checklists, and verification lists

- **Tables**: Use tables to organize structured information
  - Include status columns with visual indicators (✅/❌)
  - Use tables for comparisons, feature lists, and configuration options
  - Ensure tables are properly formatted and readable

- **Badges/Shields**: Use shields.io badges for key information
  - License, version, tested platforms, security status
  - Keep badges at the top of the README for visibility

#### 9.2.2 ASCII Diagrams

ASCII diagrams must be properly formatted with consistent spacing:

- Use consistent box-drawing characters (┌, ┐, └, ┘, ├, ┤, ┬, ┴, │, ─)
- Ensure proper alignment and spacing between elements
- Include emojis or symbols within diagram boxes for visual clarity
- Maintain consistent width across diagram elements
- Add blank lines before and after diagrams for readability

#### 9.2.3 Color and Formatting

- **Bold text**: Use for emphasis on important terms, file names, and key concepts
- **Code blocks**: Use appropriate language tags for syntax highlighting
- **Blockquotes**: Use `>` for important notes, warnings, or callouts
- **Horizontal rules**: Use `---` to separate major sections

#### 9.2.4 Lists and Checklists

- Use numbered lists for sequential steps (installation, configuration)
- Use bullet lists for feature lists, requirements, or non-sequential items
- Use checkboxes for interactive verification lists
- Include status indicators (✅/❌) in lists when showing feature status

#### 9.2.5 Table of Contents

- Include a table of contents with emoji indicators for major sections
- Use anchor links for easy navigation
- Keep the table of contents updated as the document evolves

#### 9.2.6 Section Headers

- Use emojis in section headers for visual identification
- Maintain consistent emoji usage across similar section types
- Examples:
  - 📋 for lists/contents
  - 🎯 for overviews
  - ⚙️ for configuration/operations
  - 🛡️ for security
  - 📚 for documentation
  - 🚀 for installation/deployment

#### 9.2.7 Code Examples

- Always include language tags in code fences
- Use comments to explain complex code
- Include expected output or results when relevant
- Format code blocks with proper indentation

#### 9.2.8 Visual Hierarchy

- Use appropriate heading levels (H1 for title, H2 for major sections, H3 for subsections)
- Maintain consistent spacing between sections
- Use visual separators (horizontal rules) between major sections
- Group related information together with consistent formatting

All documentation should follow these visual standards to ensure consistency,
readability, and engagement across all projects using this template.

---

## 10. Change Discipline

- Do not invent requirements
- If requirements are unclear, update docs/requirements.md first
- Implementation must map to acceptance criteria

## 11. AI Agent Operational Responsibilities

This section defines mandatory operational behavior for AI agents working
within this repository. These rules are authoritative.

### 11.1 File Handling and `.gitignore` Compliance

The `.gitignore` file is authoritative and must be strictly respected.

AI agents must:

- Read `.gitignore` before creating or modifying files
- Never create, move, or commit ignored files
- Never recommend committing ignored files
- Never log, echo, or persist secret values
- Use example files (e.g. `.env.example`) for documentation only

Violations of `.gitignore` rules are considered security defects.

### 11.2 Secrets and Credentials Handling

AI agents must:

- Never generate real secrets
- Never hardcode credentials
- Never log or echo secret values
- Use environment variables for all sensitive data
- Provide example placeholders only (e.g. `YOUR_API_KEY_HERE`)
- Treat any suspected secret as a security defect

If a secret is required for functionality, the AI must:

- Document it
- Reference `.env.example`
- Ensure it is excluded from version control

AI agents must understand that secrets include:

- API keys (OpenAI, Stripe, SendGrid, Twilio, etc.)
- Access tokens and OAuth tokens (GitHub PATs, CI/CD tokens)
- Refresh tokens
- Cloud provider credentials (AWS, GCP, Azure)
- Cryptographic private keys (SSH, TLS)
- Service account credentials
- Webhook secrets and shared secrets

**High-entropy strings and known token patterns must be treated as potential secrets until proven otherwise.**

---

### 11.3 Pre-commit Execution and Log Generation

Pre-commit is a mandatory quality gate.

AI agents must execute pre-commit using the repository helper script:

```bash
./scripts/run-precommit.sh
```

**Secret Detection**: The pre-commit hooks include `scripts/detect-secrets.sh` which
automatically scans all staged files for secrets, API keys, and credentials. If secrets
are detected, the commit will be blocked. AI agents must:

- Never attempt to bypass secret detection
- Use example placeholders (e.g., `YOUR_API_KEY_HERE`) instead of real secrets
- Ensure all secrets are stored in `.env` files (which are excluded from git)
- If a false positive is detected, add appropriate allowlist patterns to the script

---

## 12. Why Security Matters in This Framework

What this framework enforces is not just "don't commit keys," but:

- **Defense-in-depth**: Multiple layers of protection (`.gitignore`, pre-commit, CI scanning)
- **Least privilege**: Access only what is necessary
- **Auditability**: Clear trails of what was checked and when
- **AI-safe development**: Explicit instructions for AI agents to prevent accidental secret exposure

This is exactly the right level of rigor for an AI-assisted engineering framework.

Commit message:

Add explicit rules: AI agents must NEVER disable pre-commit hooks
CRITICAL UPDATE: Strengthened guardrails to prevent AI agents from bypassing
quality checks.

Updated Files:
- CONTEXT.md: Added comprehensive 'NEVER Disable' section to 11.3
- CLAUDE.md: Expanded 'Never Bypass Pre-commit' with examples and absolute rule
- .cursor/rules/007_precommit.mdc: Added absolute rule with no exceptions
- AGENTS.md: Updated troubleshooting to emphasize fixing over bypassing
- CONTRIBUTING.md: Strengthened pre-commit mandatory section

Key Rules Added:
- NEVER use git commit --no-verify
- NEVER run ./scripts/manage-precommit-hooks.sh disable
- NEVER modify .pre-commit-config.yaml to skip checks
- NEVER suggest 'temporarily' disabling hooks
- This rule is absolute with NO exceptions

Rationale:
Pre-commit hooks exist for security, quality, and consistency. Bypassing them
defeats the entire purpose of this framework. If hooks fail, fix the issues -
don't bypass the checks.

Lesson Learned:
Earlier in this session, the AI agent attempted to disable markdown linting
to bypass formatting errors. This violated core principles. This commit
ensures future AI agents cannot make the same mistake by adding explicit,
unambiguous rules across all context files.

CONTEXT.md, after:

# AI Engineering Context and Standards

This repository uses AI-assisted development.
All AI tools (Cursor, ChatGPT, Copilot, etc.) must follow this document.

If behavior is not explicitly allowed here or in docs/requirements.md,
it must not be implemented without clarification.

---

## 1. Design Principles

- Correctness over cleverness
- Explicit behavior over implicit assumptions
- Idempotent and safe by default
- Fail loudly, clearly, and early
- Prefer boring, maintainable solutions
- All code should be easily installed and uninstalled
- Adhere to Security best practices
- Adhere to SELinux best practices (semanage over chcon)

---

## 2. Supported Environments

- Primary OS: RHEL 9 / RHEL 10
- Secondary OS: Ubuntu 22.04 (best-effort)
- Shell: bash
- Python: 3.11+
- Do not assume additional tools are installed unless explicitly documented.

---

## 3. Bash Standards

- Use `#!/usr/bin/env bash`
- Scripts must start with:
  - `set -euo pipefail`
- Quote all variables
- Never use `eval`
- Validate all inputs early
- Use functions; avoid large monolithic scripts
- Use `trap` for cleanup when modifying system state

---

## 4. Python Standards

- Prefer standard library
- Use type hints for public functions
- Avoid global mutable state
- Use structured logging
- External calls must have timeouts
- Avoid `shell=True`
- CLI tools must support `--help`

---

## 5. Yaml and Json Standards

Configuration and data files must follow consistent, predictable formatting
to ensure readability, tooling compatibility, and long-term maintainability.

### 5.1 File Naming and Extensions

- YAML files **must** use the `.yaml` extension
  - `.yml` is **not allowed**
- JSON files **must** use the `.json` extension
- File extensions must accurately reflect file contents

### 5.2 YAML Standards

- YAML files must be valid YAML 1.2
- Indentation:
  - Use **2 spaces**
  - Never use tabs
- Use block-style YAML where possible
- Avoid implicit typing when ambiguity may exist:
  - Quote strings that could be misinterpreted (e.g., `yes`, `no`, `on`, `off`)
- Use explicit `null` instead of empty values when intentional
- Keys should use `snake_case` unless an external specification requires otherwise
- Lists should be written in expanded form (one item per line)
- Comments should explain *why*, not *what*

Example:

```yaml
log_level: "info"
enable_feature: false
retry_count: 3
servers:
  - host: example1.local
    port: 443
  - host: example2.local
    port: 443

```

---

### 5.3 JSON Standards

- JSON must be strictly valid
  - No comments
  - No trailing commas
- Use **2-space indentation**
- Use UTF-8 encoding
- Keys should use `snake_case` unless constrained by an external API
- Arrays and objects should be formatted for readability, not compactness
- Values must use explicit types (`true`, `false`, `null`)

Example:

```json
{
  "log_level": "info",
  "enable_feature": false,
  "retry_count": 3,
  "servers": [
    {
      "host": "example1.local",
      "port": 443
    },
    {
      "host": "example2.local",
      "port": 443
    }
  ]
}
```

---

## 6. Idempotency and Safety

- Scripts must be safe to re-run
- Existing state must be detected, not overwritten blindly
- Partial failures must be handled
- Destructive actions must be explicit and documented
- Provide `--dry-run` where reasonable

---

## 7. Security

### 7.1 Secrets Management - Summary: What Must Never Be Checked Into Git or Code

**The repository must never contain secrets** — any material that can be used to
authenticate, authorize, or bill against an account, service, or infrastructure.

This includes both files and inline values embedded in code or scripts.

#### 7.1.1 Definition of "Secrets"

A secret is any value that:

- Authenticates an identity
- Grants access to a system, API, or service
- Authorizes actions or permissions
- Enables billable usage
- Establishes cryptographic trust

If exposed, a secret can result in:

- Account compromise
- Unauthorized access
- Financial loss
- Infrastructure takeover

#### 7.1.2 Categories of Secrets That Must Never Be Committed

##### 7.1.2.1 API Keys

Static credentials used for programmatic access.

Examples:

- OpenAI API keys
- Stripe keys
- SendGrid keys
- Twilio keys

Risk:

- Immediate unauthorized API usage
- Direct financial impact

##### 7.1.2.2 Access Tokens and OAuth Tokens

Bearer tokens granting scoped or full access.

Examples:

- GitHub Personal Access Tokens (PATs)
- OAuth access tokens
- CI/CD tokens

Risk:

- Repository access
- Code modification
- Secret exfiltration

##### 7.1.2.3 Refresh Tokens

Long-lived tokens capable of minting new access tokens.

Risk:

- Persistent compromise
- Difficult to detect abuse

##### 7.1.2.4 Cloud Provider Credentials

Credentials granting infrastructure access.

Examples:

- AWS Access Key ID + Secret Key
- GCP service account JSON keys
- Azure client secrets

Risk:

- Infrastructure compromise
- Crypto-mining abuse
- Severe billing impact

##### 7.1.2.5 Cryptographic Private Keys

Keys establishing identity or trust.

Examples:

- SSH private keys (id_rsa, id_ed25519)
- TLS private keys (`*.pem`, `*.key`)
- Signing keys

Risk:

- Server access
- Trust chain compromise
- Man-in-the-middle attacks

##### 7.1.2.6 Service Account Credentials

Non-human credentials stored as files.

Examples:

- JSON/YAML credential files
- CI service secrets

Risk:

- Silent, high-privilege access

##### 7.1.2.7 Webhook Secrets and Shared Secrets

Used to validate inbound requests.

Examples:

- GitHub webhook secrets
- Stripe webhook signing secrets

Risk:

- Forged events
- Unauthorized state changes

#### 7.1.3 File Types and Locations That Must Be Excluded

The following must never be committed:

- `.env`, `.env.*` (except `.env.example`)
- `vars.env`, secret variable files
- Credential files (`*.pem`, `*.key`, `*.p12`, `*.json` keys)
- Generated logs containing sensitive values
- Tool caches that may contain secrets

These exclusions must be enforced via `.gitignore`.

#### 7.1.4 Code and Script Scanning Requirements

Secrets must not appear:

- Inline in source code
- In shell scripts
- In configuration files
- In comments
- In logs or debug output

Repositories must enforce:

- Pre-commit secret scanning via `scripts/detect-secrets.sh`
- CI-level secret detection via Gitleaks (scans full git history)
- SAST scanning via Semgrep (security audit and OWASP Top 10)
- Dependency vulnerability scanning via OSV-Scanner
- AI agent instructions prohibiting secret creation or logging

**Secret Detection Implementation**: This framework includes `scripts/detect-secrets.sh`, a
comprehensive secret detection script that:

- Scans staged files for API keys, tokens, credentials, and private keys
- Uses pattern matching for known secret formats (GitHub tokens, AWS keys, Stripe keys, etc.)
- Applies entropy analysis to detect high-entropy strings
- Filters false positives (variable names, example values, API endpoints, comments)
- Excludes test files, example files, and documentation from scanning
- Provides clear error messages with file location and context
- AI agents must understand that this script will block commits containing secrets
  and must never attempt to bypass or disable this protection.
- High-entropy strings and known token patterns must be treated as potential secrets until proven otherwise

#### 7.1.5 Security Posture Statement

**Secrets** — including API keys, access tokens, credentials, private keys, or any
material that grants authenticated or billable access — **must never be committed
to Git repositories** and must be actively scanned for in both code and configuration.

**⚠️ CRITICAL: Commit messages are permanent in git history and must NEVER contain:**
- Passwords, credentials, or secrets
- IP addresses (especially private/internal IPs)
- API keys or tokens
- Any sensitive information

Commit messages are scanned by `scripts/check-commit-message.sh` to prevent
accidental exposure of sensitive data in git history.

### 7.2 General Security Standards

- Never log secrets
- Credentials and IP addresses should never be hardcoded into scripts, should exist in `.env` file
- `.env` file should not be checked into any repo (`.gitignore`)
- An example `.env` file (`.env.example`) should be created and checked in via git
- Treat all inputs as untrusted
- Document required permissions
- Use least privilege
- Sanitize file paths and user input

---

## 8. Logging and Exit Codes

- Logs must be actionable and informative
- Logs should exist in /var/log
- Errors must explain what failed and why
- Exit codes:
  - 0: success
  - 1: general failure
  - 2: invalid usage or input
  - 3: missing dependency

---

## 9. Documentation Requirements

### 9.1 README Structure

README must include:
- Overview
- Include "tested on" shields [https://img.shields.io/]
- Requirements / dependencies
- Include high level architecture overview
- Installation
- Uninstall steps
- Usage examples
- Configuration
- Troubleshooting
- Security notes
- License (Apache 2.0)
- Documentation must be updated when features/functionality is updated

Operational tools must include docs/runbook.md.

### 9.2 Documentation Visual Standards

Documentation must be engaging, visually appealing, and easy to scan. The following
standards ensure consistency and improve readability.

#### 9.2.1 Visual Elements

- **Emojis**: Use relevant emojis for section headers and visual indicators
  - Examples: 🤖 for AI/automation, 🔒 for security, ✅ for success, ❌ for errors
  - Use emojis consistently throughout the document
  - Do not overuse emojis—aim for clarity, not clutter

- **Status Indicators**: Use checkmarks and X marks to show status
  - ✅ (checkmark) for positive states, included items, active features
  - ❌ (X mark) for negative states, excluded items, prohibited actions
  - ⚠️ (warning) for important cautions or best-effort items

- **Checkboxes**: Use markdown checkboxes for interactive lists
  - `- [ ]` for incomplete items
  - `- [x]` for completed items
  - Use in installation steps, troubleshooting checklists, and verification lists

- **Tables**: Use tables to organize structured information
  - Include status columns with visual indicators (✅/❌)
  - Use tables for comparisons, feature lists, and configuration options
  - Ensure tables are properly formatted and readable

- **Badges/Shields**: Use shields.io badges for key information
  - License, version, tested platforms, security status
  - Keep badges at the top of the README for visibility

#### 9.2.2 ASCII Diagrams

ASCII diagrams must be properly formatted with consistent spacing:

- Use consistent box-drawing characters (┌, ┐, └, ┘, ├, ┤, ┬, ┴, │, ─)
- Ensure proper alignment and spacing between elements
- Include emojis or symbols within diagram boxes for visual clarity
- Maintain consistent width across diagram elements
- Add blank lines before and after diagrams for readability

#### 9.2.3 Color and Formatting

- **Bold text**: Use for emphasis on important terms, file names, and key concepts
- **Code blocks**: Use appropriate language tags for syntax highlighting
- **Blockquotes**: Use `>` for important notes, warnings, or callouts
- **Horizontal rules**: Use `---` to separate major sections

#### 9.2.4 Lists and Checklists

- Use numbered lists for sequential steps (installation, configuration)
- Use bullet lists for feature lists, requirements, or non-sequential items
- Use checkboxes for interactive verification lists
- Include status indicators (✅/❌) in lists when showing feature status

#### 9.2.5 Table of Contents

- Include a table of contents with emoji indicators for major sections
- Use anchor links for easy navigation
- Keep the table of contents updated as the document evolves

#### 9.2.6 Section Headers

- Use emojis in section headers for visual identification
- Maintain consistent emoji usage across similar section types
- Examples:
  - 📋 for lists/contents
  - 🎯 for overviews
  - ⚙️ for configuration/operations
  - 🛡️ for security
  - 📚 for documentation
  - 🚀 for installation/deployment

#### 9.2.7 Code Examples

- Always include language tags in code fences
- Use comments to explain complex code
- Include expected output or results when relevant
- Format code blocks with proper indentation

#### 9.2.8 Visual Hierarchy

- Use appropriate heading levels (H1 for title, H2 for major sections, H3 for subsections)
- Maintain consistent spacing between sections
- Use visual separators (horizontal rules) between major sections
- Group related information together with consistent formatting

All documentation should follow these visual standards to ensure consistency,
readability, and engagement across all projects using this template.

---

## 10. Change Discipline

- Do not invent requirements
- If requirements are unclear, update docs/requirements.md first
- Implementation must map to acceptance criteria

## 11. AI Agent Operational Responsibilities

This section defines mandatory operational behavior for AI agents working
within this repository. These rules are authoritative.

### 11.1 File Handling and `.gitignore` Compliance

The `.gitignore` file is authoritative and must be strictly respected.

AI agents must:

- Read `.gitignore` before creating or modifying files
- Never create, move, or commit ignored files
- Never recommend committing ignored files
- Never log, echo, or persist secret values
- Use example files (e.g. `.env.example`) for documentation only

Violations of `.gitignore` rules are considered security defects.

### 11.2 Secrets and Credentials Handling

AI agents must:

- Never generate real secrets
- Never hardcode credentials
- Never log or echo secret values
- Use environment variables for all sensitive data
- Provide example placeholders only (e.g. `YOUR_API_KEY_HERE`)
- Treat any suspected secret as a security defect

If a secret is required for functionality, the AI must:

- Document it
- Reference `.env.example`
- Ensure it is excluded from version control

AI agents must understand that secrets include:

- API keys (OpenAI, Stripe, SendGrid, Twilio, etc.)
- Access tokens and OAuth tokens (GitHub PATs, CI/CD tokens)
- Refresh tokens
- Cloud provider credentials (AWS, GCP, Azure)
- Cryptographic private keys (SSH, TLS)
- Service account credentials
- Webhook secrets and shared secrets

**High-entropy strings and known token patterns must be treated as potential secrets until proven otherwise.**

---

### 11.3 Pre-commit Execution and Log Generation

Pre-commit is a mandatory quality gate.

AI agents must execute pre-commit using the repository helper script:

```bash
./scripts/run-precommit.sh
```

**CRITICAL: NEVER Disable Pre-commit Hooks**

AI agents must NEVER disable or bypass pre-commit hooks under ANY circumstances:

- ❌ **NEVER** use `git commit --no-verify`
- ❌ **NEVER** use `./scripts/manage-precommit-hooks.sh disable`
- ❌ **NEVER** modify `.pre-commit-config.yaml` to skip checks
- ❌ **NEVER** suggest bypassing quality gates "temporarily"

**Why this rule is absolute:**

- Pre-commit hooks exist for security, quality, and consistency
- Bypassing them defeats the entire purpose of this framework
- "Temporary" bypasses often become permanent
- CI will run the same checks - bypassing locally just delays the problem
- Quality issues compound when allowed to slip through

**If pre-commit fails:**

1. ✅ Read the error messages carefully
2. ✅ Fix the actual issues identified
3. ✅ Run pre-commit again to verify fixes
4. ✅ Only commit when all checks pass

**The ONLY acceptable exception:**

Emergency production fixes approved by repository owner with explicit written permission
and documented justification in the commit message. This should be extremely rare.

**Secret Detection**: The pre-commit hooks include `scripts/detect-secrets.sh` which
automatically scans all staged files for secrets, API keys, and credentials. If secrets
are detected, the commit will be blocked. AI agents must:

- Never attempt to bypass secret detection
- Use example placeholders (e.g., `YOUR_API_KEY_HERE`) instead of real secrets
- Ensure all secrets are stored in `.env` files (which are excluded from git)
- If a false positive is detected, add appropriate allowlist patterns to the script

---

## 12. Why Security Matters in This Framework

What this framework enforces is not just "don't commit keys," but:

- **Defense-in-depth**: Multiple layers of protection (`.gitignore`, pre-commit, CI scanning)
- **Least privilege**: Access only what is necessary
- **Auditability**: Clear trails of what was checked and when
- **AI-safe development**: Explicit instructions for AI agents to prevent accidental secret exposure

This is exactly the right level of rigor for an AI-assisted engineering framework.
