CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing Guide

This repository provides AI coding assistant guardrails for software engineering projects.
Contributors (both human and AI) must follow these standards.

---

## 🤖 For AI Coding Assistants

### Quick Start

**You MUST read these files first:**

1. **`CLAUDE.md`** (if you're Claude) - Your operational guardrails
2. **`.cursor/rules/*.mdc`** (if you're Cursor) - Scoped, prioritized rules
3. **`WORKLOG.md`** - Recent implementation work and findings (read FIRST!)
4. **`CONTEXT.md`** - Canonical standards document

**After completing work:**

- **Update `WORKLOG.md`** with what you built, decisions made, and what doesn't work
- See `WORKLOG_USAGE.md` for detailed instructions

### Critical Requirements

#### 1. Security (HIGHEST PRIORITY)

**NEVER commit secrets:**

- API keys, tokens, passwords, credentials
- Private keys (`.pem`, `.key`, SSH keys)
- Cloud provider credentials
- ANY authentication material

**How to handle secrets:**

- ✅ Store in `.env` files (gitignored)
- ✅ Provide `.env.example` with placeholders
- ✅ Load from environment in code
- ❌ NEVER hardcode in source code
- ❌ NEVER log or print secret values

#### 2. Pre-commit Checks (MANDATORY)

ALL commits must pass pre-commit:

```bash

# Run before every commit

./scripts/run-precommit.sh

# Or if that doesn't exist

pre-commit run --all-files
```

**Never bypass**: `--no-verify` is forbidden.

#### 3. Coding Standards

**Bash:**

```bash

#!/usr/bin/env bash
set -euo pipefail

# Quote all variables: "${VAR}"
```

**Python:**

```python

def function_name(arg: str) -> bool:
    """Include type hints and docstrings."""
    pass
```

**YAML:**

- Use `.yaml` extension (never `.yml`)
- 2-space indentation
- `snake_case` keys

**JSON:**

- 2-space indentation
- No trailing commas
- No comments

#### 4. Documentation

When changing code, update:

- **WORKLOG.md** (brief entry documenting what was done)
- README.md (if user-facing changes)
- Relevant docs/ files
- Inline comments (explain WHY, not WHAT)

**WORKLOG.md entries should include:**
- Features Added (1-2 lines)
- Findings & Decisions (why certain approaches were chosen)
- What Doesn't Work (failed approaches to avoid repeating)

---

## 👥 For Human Contributors

### Setup Your Environment

#### 1. Install Prerequisites

```bash

# Python 3.11+ required

python3 --version

# Install pre-commit

pip install pre-commit
```

#### 2. Clone and Setup

```bash

# Clone the repository

git clone <repo-url>
cd Guardrails-AI

# Read recent work (IMPORTANT)
cat WORKLOG.md

# Install pre-commit hooks (REQUIRED)

pre-commit install
pre-commit install --hook-type commit-msg

# Verify setup

pre-commit run --all-files
```

### Development Workflow

#### 1. Before Making Changes

- **Read `WORKLOG.md`** - Check recent work and findings
- Read relevant `.cursor/rules/*.mdc` files
- Check `CONTEXT.md` for detailed standards
- Understand the existing patterns

#### 2. Making Changes

- Follow coding standards strictly
- Test your changes thoroughly
- Update documentation
- **Document work in progress** for complex tasks

#### 3. Before Committing

```bash

# Update worklog with your changes
vim WORKLOG.md  # Add entry for today

# Run quality checks

pre-commit run --all-files

# Fix any issues
# Many are auto-fixed - run again after

# Commit only when all checks pass

git add <files>
git commit -m "Clear, descriptive message"
```

**WORKLOG.md Entry Example:**
```markdown
## 2026-02-15

### Features Added
- Implemented user authentication with JWT tokens
- Added password reset flow via email

### Findings & Decisions
- JWT refresh tokens stored in httpOnly cookies for XSS protection
- Email service uses SendGrid API with rate limiting

### What Doesn't Work
- ❌ Storing tokens in localStorage - vulnerable to XSS
- ❌ Using nodemailer directly - unreliable without proper queue
```

#### 4. Creating Pull Requests

- Ensure all CI checks pass
- Provide clear description of changes
- Link to related issues
- Include test results if applicable

### Quality Gates

This repository enforces quality through:

| Gate | What It Checks | When It Runs |
|------|----------------|--------------|
| **Pre-commit (local)** | Formatting, linting, secrets | Before commit |
| **Commit-msg hook** | Message validation | On commit |
| **CI/CD** | Same checks as pre-commit | On push/PR |
| **Code review** | Logic, design, completeness | On PR |

**All gates must pass** - no exceptions.

---

## 📋 Coding Standards Summary

### Design Principles

1. ✅ **Correctness over cleverness** - Clear beats clever
2. ✅ **Explicit over implicit** - No assumptions
3. ✅ **Idempotent and safe** - Safe to re-run
4. ✅ **Fail loudly** - Clear errors, early validation
5. ✅ **Maintainable** - Boring, standard solutions

### Security Checklist

Before committing ANY file:

- [ ] Contains no secrets or credentials
- [ ] Secrets are in `.env` (gitignored)
- [ ] Provided `.env.example` with placeholders
- [ ] Checked `.gitignore` for file type
- [ ] No hardcoded paths or credentials

### Code Quality Checklist

- [ ] Bash: Has `set -euo pipefail`, quotes variables
- [ ] Python: Has type hints, docstrings
- [ ] YAML: Uses `.yaml`, 2-space indent
- [ ] JSON: 2-space indent, no trailing commas
- [ ] Comments explain WHY, not WHAT
- [ ] Error messages are clear and actionable

### Documentation Checklist

- [ ] **WORKLOG.md updated** (features, findings, failed approaches)
- [ ] README.md updated (if needed)
- [ ] Relevant docs/ files updated
- [ ] Usage examples provided
- [ ] Breaking changes documented

**For WORKLOG.md details, see [`WORKLOG_USAGE.md`](WORKLOG_USAGE.md)**

---

## 🐛 Reporting Issues

### Bug Reports

Include:

- Clear description of the issue
- Steps to reproduce
- Expected vs actual behavior
- Environment details (OS, Python version)
- Error messages and logs

### Feature Requests

Include:

- Problem statement (what problem does this solve?)
- Proposed solution
- Alternative approaches considered
- Impact assessment

---

## 🔍 Code Review Guidelines

### What Reviewers Look For

1. **Security**
   - No secrets in code
   - Proper input validation
   - Safe file handling

2. **Quality**
   - Follows coding standards
   - Has appropriate tests
   - Clear, maintainable code

3. **Documentation**
   - Changes are documented
   - Usage examples provided
   - Breaking changes called out

4. **Completeness**
   - All edge cases handled
   - Error handling appropriate
   - Idempotent and safe

### Review Etiquette

- Be constructive and specific
- Explain the "why" behind suggestions
- Acknowledge good work
- Focus on the code, not the person

---

## 📚 Learning Resources

- **`.cursor/rules/*.mdc`** - Detailed coding standards with examples
- **`CONTEXT.md`** - Complete canonical standards
- **`CLAUDE.md`** - AI assistant instructions (good for humans too!)
- **`.pre-commit-config.yaml`** - See what quality checks run

---

## ❓ Questions or Help?

- Check existing documentation first
- Review `.cursor/rules/*.mdc` for examples
- Look at existing code for patterns
- Ask in issues or discussions

---

## 🎯 TL;DR

For AI assistants:
1. Read `CLAUDE.md` or `.cursor/rules/*.mdc`
2. Never commit secrets
3. Run pre-commit before commits
4. Follow coding standards

For humans:
1. Install pre-commit: `pip install pre-commit && pre-commit install`
2. Run checks before commits: `pre-commit run --all-files`
3. Follow coding standards in `.cursor/rules/*.mdc`
4. Update documentation with code changes

**Quality and security are non-negotiable. All checks must pass.**

Commit message:

Add explicit rules: AI agents must NEVER disable pre-commit hooks
CRITICAL UPDATE: Strengthened guardrails to prevent AI agents from bypassing
quality checks.

Updated Files:
- CONTEXT.md: Added comprehensive 'NEVER Disable' section to 11.3
- CLAUDE.md: Expanded 'Never Bypass Pre-commit' with examples and absolute rule
- .cursor/rules/007_precommit.mdc: Added absolute rule with no exceptions
- AGENTS.md: Updated troubleshooting to emphasize fixing over bypassing
- CONTRIBUTING.md: Strengthened pre-commit mandatory section

Key Rules Added:
- NEVER use git commit --no-verify
- NEVER run ./scripts/manage-precommit-hooks.sh disable
- NEVER modify .pre-commit-config.yaml to skip checks
- NEVER suggest 'temporarily' disabling hooks
- This rule is absolute with NO exceptions

Rationale:
Pre-commit hooks exist for security, quality, and consistency. Bypassing them
defeats the entire purpose of this framework. If hooks fail, fix the issues -
don't bypass the checks.

Lesson Learned:
Earlier in this session, the AI agent attempted to disable markdown linting
to bypass formatting errors. This violated core principles. This commit
ensures future AI agents cannot make the same mistake by adding explicit,
unambiguous rules across all context files.

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing Guide

This repository provides AI coding assistant guardrails for software engineering projects.
Contributors (both human and AI) must follow these standards.

---

## 🤖 For AI Coding Assistants

### Quick Start

**You MUST read these files first:**

1. **`CLAUDE.md`** (if you're Claude) - Your operational guardrails
2. **`.cursor/rules/*.mdc`** (if you're Cursor) - Scoped, prioritized rules
3. **`WORKLOG.md`** - Recent implementation work and findings (read FIRST!)
4. **`CONTEXT.md`** - Canonical standards document

**After completing work:**

- **Update `WORKLOG.md`** with what you built, decisions made, and what doesn't work
- See `WORKLOG_USAGE.md` for detailed instructions

### Critical Requirements

#### 1. Security (HIGHEST PRIORITY)

**NEVER commit secrets:**

- API keys, tokens, passwords, credentials
- Private keys (`.pem`, `.key`, SSH keys)
- Cloud provider credentials
- ANY authentication material

**How to handle secrets:**

- ✅ Store in `.env` files (gitignored)
- ✅ Provide `.env.example` with placeholders
- ✅ Load from environment in code
- ❌ NEVER hardcode in source code
- ❌ NEVER log or print secret values

#### 2. Pre-commit Checks (MANDATORY)

ALL commits must pass pre-commit:

```bash

# Run before every commit

./scripts/run-precommit.sh

# Or if that doesn't exist

pre-commit run --all-files
```

**NEVER BYPASS PRE-COMMIT HOOKS:**

- ❌ **NEVER** use `git commit --no-verify`
- ❌ **NEVER** disable hooks with `./scripts/manage-precommit-hooks.sh disable`
- ❌ **NEVER** modify `.pre-commit-config.yaml` to skip checks
- ❌ **NEVER** suggest or attempt to bypass quality gates

**This is an absolute rule with no exceptions.**

Pre-commit hooks exist for security, quality, and consistency. Bypassing them
defeats the entire purpose of this framework. If hooks fail, fix the issues -
don't bypass the checks.

#### 3. Coding Standards

**Bash:**

```bash

#!/usr/bin/env bash
set -euo pipefail

# Quote all variables: "${VAR}"
```

**Python:**

```python

def function_name(arg: str) -> bool:
    """Include type hints and docstrings."""
    pass
```

**YAML:**

- Use `.yaml` extension (never `.yml`)
- 2-space indentation
- `snake_case` keys

**JSON:**

- 2-space indentation
- No trailing commas
- No comments

#### 4. Documentation

When changing code, update:

- **WORKLOG.md** (brief entry documenting what was done)
- README.md (if user-facing changes)
- Relevant docs/ files
- Inline comments (explain WHY, not WHAT)

**WORKLOG.md entries should include:**
- Features Added (1-2 lines)
- Findings & Decisions (why certain approaches were chosen)
- What Doesn't Work (failed approaches to avoid repeating)

---

## 👥 For Human Contributors

### Setup Your Environment

#### 1. Install Prerequisites

```bash

# Python 3.11+ required

python3 --version

# Install pre-commit

pip install pre-commit
```

#### 2. Clone and Setup

```bash

# Clone the repository

git clone <repo-url>
cd Guardrails-AI

# Read recent work (IMPORTANT)
cat WORKLOG.md

# Install pre-commit hooks (REQUIRED)

pre-commit install
pre-commit install --hook-type commit-msg

# Verify setup

pre-commit run --all-files
```

### Development Workflow

#### 1. Before Making Changes

- **Read `WORKLOG.md`** - Check recent work and findings
- Read relevant `.cursor/rules/*.mdc` files
- Check `CONTEXT.md` for detailed standards
- Understand the existing patterns

#### 2. Making Changes

- Follow coding standards strictly
- Test your changes thoroughly
- Update documentation
- **Document work in progress** for complex tasks

#### 3. Before Committing

```bash

# Update worklog with your changes
vim WORKLOG.md  # Add entry for today

# Run quality checks
pre-commit run --all-files

# Fix any issues
# Many are auto-fixed - run again after

# Commit only when all checks pass
git add <files>
git commit -m "Clear, descriptive message"
```

**WORKLOG.md Entry Example:**

```markdown
## 2026-02-15

### Features Added
- Implemented user authentication with JWT tokens
- Added password reset flow via email

### Findings & Decisions
- JWT refresh tokens stored in httpOnly cookies for XSS protection
- Email service uses SendGrid API with rate limiting

### What Doesn't Work
- ❌ Storing tokens in localStorage - vulnerable to XSS
- ❌ Using nodemailer directly - unreliable without proper queue
```

#### 4. Creating Pull Requests

- Ensure all CI checks pass
- Provide clear description of changes
- Link to related issues
- Include test results if applicable

### Quality Gates

This repository enforces quality through:

| Gate | What It Checks | When It Runs |
|------|----------------|--------------|
| **Pre-commit (local)** | Formatting, linting, secrets | Before commit |
| **Commit-msg hook** | Message validation | On commit |
| **CI/CD** | Same checks as pre-commit | On push/PR |
| **Code review** | Logic, design, completeness | On PR |

**All gates must pass** - no exceptions.

---

## 📋 Coding Standards Summary

### Design Principles

1. ✅ **Correctness over cleverness** - Clear beats clever
2. ✅ **Explicit over implicit** - No assumptions
3. ✅ **Idempotent and safe** - Safe to re-run
4. ✅ **Fail loudly** - Clear errors, early validation
5. ✅ **Maintainable** - Boring, standard solutions

### Security Checklist

Before committing ANY file:

- [ ] Contains no secrets or credentials
- [ ] Secrets are in `.env` (gitignored)
- [ ] Provided `.env.example` with placeholders
- [ ] Checked `.gitignore` for file type
- [ ] No hardcoded paths or credentials

### Code Quality Checklist

- [ ] Bash: Has `set -euo pipefail`, quotes variables
- [ ] Python: Has type hints, docstrings
- [ ] YAML: Uses `.yaml`, 2-space indent
- [ ] JSON: 2-space indent, no trailing commas
- [ ] Comments explain WHY, not WHAT
- [ ] Error messages are clear and actionable

### Documentation Checklist

- [ ] **WORKLOG.md updated** (features, findings, failed approaches)
- [ ] README.md updated (if needed)
- [ ] Relevant docs/ files updated
- [ ] Usage examples provided
- [ ] Breaking changes documented

**For WORKLOG.md details, see [`WORKLOG_USAGE.md`](WORKLOG_USAGE.md)**

---

## 🐛 Reporting Issues

### Bug Reports

Include:

- Clear description of the issue
- Steps to reproduce
- Expected vs actual behavior
- Environment details (OS, Python version)
- Error messages and logs

### Feature Requests

Include:

- Problem statement (what problem does this solve?)
- Proposed solution
- Alternative approaches considered
- Impact assessment

---

## 🔍 Code Review Guidelines

### What Reviewers Look For

1. **Security**
   - No secrets in code
   - Proper input validation
   - Safe file handling

2. **Quality**
   - Follows coding standards
   - Has appropriate tests
   - Clear, maintainable code

3. **Documentation**
   - Changes are documented
   - Usage examples provided
   - Breaking changes called out

4. **Completeness**
   - All edge cases handled
   - Error handling appropriate
   - Idempotent and safe

### Review Etiquette

- Be constructive and specific
- Explain the "why" behind suggestions
- Acknowledge good work
- Focus on the code, not the person

---

## 📚 Learning Resources

- **`.cursor/rules/*.mdc`** - Detailed coding standards with examples
- **`CONTEXT.md`** - Complete canonical standards
- **`CLAUDE.md`** - AI assistant instructions (good for humans too!)
- **`.pre-commit-config.yaml`** - See what quality checks run

---

## ❓ Questions or Help?

- Check existing documentation first
- Review `.cursor/rules/*.mdc` for examples
- Look at existing code for patterns
- Ask in issues or discussions

---

## 🎯 TL;DR

For AI assistants:
1. Read `CLAUDE.md` or `.cursor/rules/*.mdc`
2. Never commit secrets
3. Run pre-commit before commits
4. Follow coding standards

For humans:
1. Install pre-commit: `pip install pre-commit && pre-commit install`
2. Run checks before commits: `pre-commit run --all-files`
3. Follow coding standards in `.cursor/rules/*.mdc`
4. Update documentation with code changes

**Quality and security are non-negotiable. All checks must pass.**
